New features in angular 7
Now, without any further adieu, let’s dive into discussing the new features of Angular 7 one-by-one, and see how each of them improve the frontend development process for the better.

1. CLI prompts
In Angular 7, the CLI prompts have been updated to v7.0.2 with new features. For instance, it will now prompt users when typing commands like @angular/material, ng-new, and ng-add to help them discover the in-built SCSS support, routing, and more.

angular virtual scroll drag drop cli prompts

These CLI prompts, in addition, have been added to Schematics, so that all package publishing schematics can now benefit from CLI prompts.

2. Angular material & component dev kit (CDK)
The Angular 7 introduced minor visual updates & improvements in Material Design that earlier received a major update this year only.

In addition, refresh, virtual scrolling, large lists of data, dynamic loading and unloading of parts of the DOM also were the part of improvements in CDK and Angular Material.

History of angular’s versions angular material component dev kit (cdk)

Furthermore, the applications in Angular 7 can now also be fitted with drag-and-drop functionality by either importing ScrollingModule or DragDropModule.

3. Drag & drop
The new drag-drop module basically provides a better way to easily create drag & drop interfaces, which is backed by sorting within a list, support for free dragging, animations, custom drag handles, transferring items between lists, previews, and placeholders.

angular virtual scroll drag drop

In simple terms, the Drag-and-Drop support has now been implemented in CDK and it also includes automatic rendering as the users relocates items.

angular virtual scroll drag drop virtual scrolling

angular virtual scroll drag drop virtual scrollings

4. Virtual scrolling
Like mentioned earlier, the new Virtual Scrolling in Angular 7 basically loads and unloads items from the DOM depending upon visible parts of lists, resulting into a much faster experiences for users having huge scrollable lists.

This virtual scrolling package basically provides helpers, which react to all scroll events.

angular virtual scroll drag drop angular material component dev kit (cdk)

Simply put, it activates a high-performant way by making the height of container element exactly same as the height of total number of remaining elements to be rendered.

This, in turn, then renders the only visible items in view, creating faster experiences for the end-users.

5. Application performance improvements
The development team at Google have always focused on the performance improvements, and while doing so, they recently found that most of the developers were using reflect-metadata in their production, which actually was only required in the development.

angular virtual scroll drag drop angular Highlights

So, to fix this problem, they’ve made a part of Angular 7 to automatically remove this from the polyfills.ts file.

History of angular’s versions angular 7 highlights

Upgrading requirements
The Upgrading process is really simple. For most Angular apps out there that are running on Angular 6 and RxJS 6, you only need to run a single command stated below to upgrade to Angular 7.

angular virtual scroll drag drop code

If, however, you’re using Angular Material, use following single line command and you’re good to go!

angular virtual scroll drag drop material

During the upgrade process, if anything seems unusual, check out the update guide to see if you need to execute any special commands.

Takeaway
All in all, the Angular 7 seems like a far better solution. The Angular development team has certainly did a great job in making the Angular platform better.


